Oh yeah. Okay. So we had a bottle of uh I mean I have that you have the body okay the bottle made a great of water made a great impact on the governor too and he said that he would keep that bottle of Nashua River water on his desk. He said it's a paperweight and it's a constant reminder to him of what needed to be done.
And our legislators were all there, except this one legislator whose youngster was sick.
I think there were 24 legislators representing watershed constituency.
And it was a very critical time.
I think that what we had there is he said he was
Yeah, right.
I just wanted to say that this was just on the eve of the passage of the Clean Waters Act of 1966 in Massachusetts, so it was critical that we present this petition effort in Dirty
Nashua River Water in the presence of our state legislators so that they could work with Governor Volpe to secure the passage of this legislation, which then subsequently made available a $150 million bond issue to assist communities to construct wastewater treatment facilities.
And it also established the Division of Water Pollution Control in Massachusetts.
And do you think that this was the actual catalyst?
Absolutely, without...
question because it was just a week, I think, before the legislature trove rolled and we've been told there wasn't a chance in the world that this legislation would be passed that legislative year, but it was passed.
So what I'm saying is one of the importance of our being there or this whole effort was that in the very beginning
We had made contact with the governor and with our state legislators and with all of our top elected officials and they were all supportive and they all came together to register their interests and concern and support.
And then what happened was right after this, we knew that Senator Ted Kennedy was coming
to Massachusetts in bringing Secretary of the Interior, Udall, to visit polluted rivers.
And they were going to visit four.
They hadn't planned to visit the Nashua, but we asked them to include the Nashua on his itinerary.
And because of the citizen concern,
demonstrated by the petition effort, they included the Nashua.
And we had been told by the senator's office just three days in advance of his coming that he would be there.
And in three days, we got 500 people to the airport, Fishburne-Leminister Airport, to greet them.
Well, this was the largest group of people that they had.
meeting them anywhere.
And we had people like a busload of golden agers.
Now, did you organize these people?
Yes.
How do you do this?
I don't think we've really gotten into this, because we are hitting the significant parts, but I asked you earlier what your greatest strength was, and you said organization, how do you
How do you get a busload or two or three busloads of people?
Well, we'd only identified these people because the Golden Acres because they were people that helped us get the signatures on a petition to present to the governor.
So when we went back to look for people and we wanted to get as many people as we could
to greet Senator Kennedy and Secretary Udall, we then went back to those people who had helped us with our petition effort and asked them to get a group of people to come.
So they hired a bus, and they all came, and they had signs.
It was really terrific.
And boy, did that make an impression on Kennedy and Udall.
Well, because they were impressed by people.
They were impressed by votes.
Yeah, exactly.
Nothing happens in a vacuum.
That's right.
And they said this, and this is in these newspaper clips that you have, because they were just going back to Washington to vote on this $6 billion federal legislation for monies to assist municipalities to construct wastewater treatment facilities.
And they said, boy, is this going to help us get this through Congress?
And you can be sure that Massachusetts will be high on the list.
And then what happened was, what was really exciting was that
When Senator Kennedy and Secretary Udall came to the airport, they brought Governor Volpe and Lieutenant Governor Elliot Richardson to come there too.
And right after they left the airport and finished their tour, then they went back to Boston that night.
Governor Volpe signed into law
this Clean Waters Act of 1966, which was at that time considered to be the most comprehensive water quality act that any state had.
So we really felt awfully good about that.
And I remember a funny little incident that day when this group was there, a couple of funny incidents.
And we gave Senator Kennedy and Secretary Udall a bottle of this water, too.
And Governor Volpe looked at Secretary Udall's bottle and said, gee, you fellows didn't get nearly as good a sample as I did.
And he said, here, let me open this up so you can smell it.
He said, just so you can see how bad it is.
Volpe said that?
Yeah.
And so he was opening his bottle.
And when he was opening it,
got unscrewed wrong and it fell all over his shoes.
But anyway, everyone got a good quip of it.
But the other funny thing was that I was sitting next to Lieutenant Governor Richardson and I was working on my comment because I had been asked if I was going to say something and I was trying to decide
whether I should be asking for that the river be made clean enough to swim in because it was so dirty you can't imagine what a request that was to say that we want this river to be clean enough to swim in and I was fiddling with this whether it should be swimming or just boating and fishing and Lieutenant Governor Richardson said he said ask for swimming he said always ask for
what are the most that you want and so that was extremely helpful to me and so for him to tell me that and so I did, I asked for swimming.
He was giving you a little political tip there.
He sure was and it was very useful and after that I could get up and I could ask that the Nashua River be made clean enough for swimming.
Do you really hope that you think that it can be?
Oh yes.
Well apparently then you didn't think it could be though.
I wasn't sure whether it was the most politically astute thing to be asking for at that time.
And he helped me to realize that it was.
And what was very important was that we spent that whole next year then preparing for a river classification hearing.
And we knew, you see, the Federal Waterfall Act.
1965, asked that all rivers be classified for their future highest use of interstate rivers by, I think it was March 30th, I don't know what the date was, sometime in 66.
In other words, they were picking a value that they thought this is the best it can ever get to be?
No, no.
The best that you can hope it can be?
No, they're really saying to the people, okay, we're going to give the public an opportunity to say how clean they want the rivers to be and why.
And as Secretary Udall said, he said, people can have as clean of water as they want as long as they're willing to pay for it.
And so we had to then
find out from the people who lived in the watershed how clean they wanted their river to be and what were they willing to pay for and what did they want to use the river for.
It was a pretty important thing to find out.
Absolutely essential and we had a whole year to prepare for this and we worked that whole year organizing this effort and we identified
every group in every community in the watershed, 32 communities.
I mean, there are social groups, service groups, religious groups, fraternal groups, educational groups, and their leaders.
And we contacted them, and we told them about the hearing and the importance of the hearing.
And we worked to persuade them that what they thought
would have an effect and we told them that we wanted a class B river and why and we told them that we hoped that they would want a class B river and that here was their chance and so
Class A was unobtainable.
No, no, we didn't want a Class A river because in Massachusetts a Class A river can only be used for drinking.
You can't swim in it, you can't fish in it, you can't boat in it.
Are there any Class A rivers there?
Yes.
All of the south branch of the watershed is Class A and it all drains into Wachusett-Rensifort.
So really what you were shooting for was the best?
Even though the number... That would provide the most benefits to the public.
Right.
But by wanting the best, you had to give more, right?
People had to... And the cost, that's right.
And so they had to really think about how much they wanted clean water in the Nashua, how important that was to them.
And so when we went to the hearings,
It was the largest hearing that was held in Massachusetts.
Where was it held?
It was held at the Fitchburg State College Auditorium, and there were hundreds of people there.
And I remember people from the Department of the Interior were monitoring that meeting, and they couldn't believe that there were so many people there.
And it was really funny.
But they were there, really serious people, our legislators and our selectmen.
You see, we had contacted also the boards of selectmen, the planning boards, the conservation commissions, the boards of health, the parks and recreation commissions, and the water departments, and the school departments, as well as these
these groups to ask them to be there and to make a statement.
And if they couldn't be there, to send in a written statement and to say not only how clean they wanted it, but why they wanted it to be that thing, which was very important to justify.
And this was when now?
What year was this?
This was in 1967.
The hearing was in March of 1967.
Would you say this was the critical point?
Yes.
And the reason is because without the backing, you couldn't have done it.
Well, it was official, you see.
The Federal Water Quality Act of 1965 said every state must classify their interstate waters for their future highest use
by, I think it's June 30, 1977.
And you'll see information, these newspaper clips about it.
What was so important about it was that it gave the public an opportunity to participate in the classification of our rivers.
See, I had been very angry before then because when I was inquiring about the Nashua River, shortly after I moved here, I contacted
There was no Division of Water Pollution Control then.
And it was, well, the Department of Public Health had responsibility for the water.
But there was a group, and there still is a group, called the New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission.
And it was a group that had representation from the various New England states, and also New York.
And they would get together, and
a certain number of times during the year to discuss water quality problems and to decide on a kind of informal basis
what rivers they were going to try to upgrade, and how much they're going to try to upgrade it.
So it was, in fact, incredible.
Yeah, so I found out just before this hearing, like maybe a year or so before this hearing, that this group had just gotten together and they discussed the Nashua, and they decided they were going to upgrade it to a D. And I said, a D?
I said, that's terrible.
That's nothing.
And the director said, well,
You know, that's what we decided to do.
And I said, well, I said, I live in this area.
I'm concerned.
I said, I don't like that.
I said, I want it to be better than that.
I said, what can I do?
He said, nothing.
And I said, you know, you've got to be kidding.
I said, there must be something to do.
And he said, well, if you can get the governor to change the designation.
But then what was so important was that this federal law firm was passing
before a river is classified for its future highest use there must be a public hearing people must be heard so this was wonderful and so we knew that the state was coming into that hearing asking for a D river and so then we were told and I think I feel it was correct information that because of our
citizen interest and concern that the state decided that they couldn't come in with a request for a D. They would have to come in with a request for a C because, of course, they were being monitored by the Department of Interior.
That's why the Department of Interior was there, was to see what was happening.
So they came asking for a C. We said, that's not good enough.
We said, this is the hearing.
We want B.
And as a result of the hearing, after the hearing, the state decided that, well, they would have to respond to what we wanted.
We just don't think that it is technically or economically possible to attain a leap in five years.
But we will... Well, is that the time frame?
Yeah, right, right, five years.
But we think that we've got to be realistic.
We think the very best that can be done is a modified C on the main stem.
And the modification was that...
was the bacterial requirement.
And so the bacterial requirement was that it be a B bacterial requirement so that the river would in fact be safe for swimming.
And so once the classification was set after the hearing, it had to be approved by the Department of Interior, and it was, then we just worked very, very hard to see that
I mean, the schedules then were established for these polluters to meet.
And we worked very hard to see that these schedules were being met.
And the division only had a certain number of people working, and they didn't have enough people to do all the things that needed to be done.
But because we were an active citizens group on the Nashua, we did, our river did get more attention than some other rivers.
Would something like this have been impossible five or six years ago?
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Again, this is one of the concrete, tangible results, I would say, is that you can put out a guide to canoeing.
Where would you say some of the best places for me to go look at the river would be?
What would you recommend?
Probably from, well, bridges.
Let's see.
where rivers come together, like in Lancaster.
I'm thinking for pictures type thing.
Pardon?
I'm thinking for pictures.
Yeah, I am too.
Well, I understand that photographers like to get up high and look down.
Is that what you're looking for?
Yeah, but I think kids fishing would be great too.
Kids fishing.
Well, you really have to
Why don't you think about it, because I'm going to have to call you back for some more questions anyway.
Yeah.
I wonder if there were any frustrations that you had, any major frustrations along the way.
Let me tell you about pictures first.
We've got a tremendous collection of colored slides over at our office.
That was my next question.
Showing it bad, too?
Yeah.
Are all the colors, those famous red and yellow colors?
Yeah, we've got those.
I mean, is that gone now?
That's no longer, right?
Yeah, no.
But, you know, we're doing something to cities we haven't talked about, and we're talking about mostly, I think, we haven't talked about our urban greenway very much.
We should talk about that.
But we've worked very hard this past year in Fitchburg with the Fitchburg River Subcommittee, which we helped organize.
And we're very much concerned that
people in Fitchburg who were thinking of those wastewater treatment facilities as big white elephants and being very resentful of them.
So we did go in and meet with Fitchburg business leaders and particularly, well, the time that I became most involved in meeting with Fitchburg business leaders was
about a year ago when the City Revitalization Committee were looking for suggestions for revitalization of the city of Fitchburg.
And so we suggested to them that the revitalization of the city take place along the river, that here, you know, the river had been a terrible deficit to the city, but now it represented its
a greatest potential asset.
Like they did in San Antonio.
Yeah.
And that, yes, that would be a terrible waste of Fitchburg taxpayers' money if they didn't take advantage of the clean water that they were producing in their treatment facilities.
Those two treatment plants cost about $25 million.
Wow.
And it cost them, jeez, I don't know, it must be close to a million dollars to operate annually.
It's a big expense.
I mean, next to schools, their largest capital expenditure.
Wow.
We're saying, okay, the economy of the region can be enhanced by the natural river if you business leaders and city planners recognize this possibility and take advantage of it, plan for it, take advantage of it.
And so we helped to organize this river subcommittee to do this and to tie in the revitalization of the city with the restoration of the river, establish an urban greenway.
And in this instance, working with the Corps of Engineers that plans to do some rehabilitation work there in the city, to make sure that whatever work they do would complement or assist with the subcommittee's work.
And we hired them.
an intern who's a landscape designer who's getting his masters at Harvard to work with the subcommittee.
And he has developed wonderful plans.
He's been working with the city planners, the revitalization committee, to develop these plans.
What would they include?
What types of things?
A pathway in pocket parks.
The committee has begun to talk with the industries and other landowners along the river about the plans and about opportunities for their participation and how they would benefit, how the city would benefit.
Do you think this is on the immediate horizon?
Yes.
Like how close?
Like at Lowell, you know, it's a Lowell cultural heritage part.
I was just going to tell you this, like that just today, earlier today, and I was brought up in Lowell.
Yeah.
And I know the river around.
Right.
And I was driving with my wife and my sister, I said, gee, look at, I mean, it's nice.
You know, it's very, very nice.
Right along by the GE, by the General Electric Plant.
Are you talking about Fitchburg or Lowell?
In Lowell.
Yeah.
Did you mention Lowell?
Yeah, I did.
I did.
Just.
Right there, it's, you know, they've got these walks and things from afar.
It's really nice.
I don't know that particular site, but I do know that there are some beautiful places along the Merrimack River in Lowell.
And I do know some of the plants, the Lowell Heritage Cultural Park.
And they're, that's terrific.
And so, so anyway, I just didn't want to.
Well, do you think
Are they moving towards the establishment of these things?
Do you think it's just at the talking stage now?
Well, they've got the plans.
They know all the owners.
Who can I talk to to find out something about these plans?
Well, you can talk with Ruth.
Mayor, who's the chairman of the Fitchburg Conservation Commission, or you can talk with Mayor, M-A-Y-O-R, Mrs. Harry Mayor, or you can talk with the city planner, what's his name?
I can find out.
Bob, hmm, jumped out of my mind.
Okay.
And
So you do have a lot of photos down at... Mostly colored slides.
Great.
Maybe they want that.
Hopefully.
Yeah.
I'd be delighted if they used the color pictures.
Let's see where we are.
I think, I know
We should wrap it up pretty soon.
Two hours is probably long enough for one session.
And I'll have to evaluate what we've got.
Were there any frustrations along the way that?
No, not really.
Not for me, because I really get it's like if something goes
Well, it's like a shot of adrenaline for me.
It's a new challenge.
And there have been... But I know what you're talking about, and I can tell you that at one point, it was Fitchburg Paper Company,
decided that they wanted to withdraw from their contractual agreement with the city to participate in the construction of a wastewater treatment facility just, I think it was five days before groundbreaking.
Wow.
And that was... Why did they do that?
Why did they?
You'd have to ask them.
Okay.
But anyway... But at any rate, that's what they wanted to do.
This was when, roughly... Oh, geez, that must have been in 60...
Maybe 70?
I'm not sure.
Would that be?
No, it wasn't that long ago because it's only been built.
I don't know, maybe 72?
Okay.
Something like that.
Yeah, 73, 72.
And so it was just when EPA was being organized, probably 72.
And they didn't feel that they had any real thrust.
The state didn't feel that they had a handle on the thing.
And...
The warehouses didn't want to get involved.
I mean, they were very upset.
The city didn't really want to get involved.
And so we organized a citizen's suit against Fitchburg Paper Company, really against Lytton Industries.
And we received legal assistance, well, from one of our own directors.
But we received legal assistance from EPA and from
the state to help us because they felt that we were in the best position.
And this is five days before ground breaking?
Yes, I think it was five days.
It was five or ten days before ground breaking.
And it would have been a disaster if they'd been successful because it was felt that it would then hold back construction by at least five years.
What was their share of that?
Well, they were
It was substantial.
Weyerhaeuser was in this also, right?
That's right.
So if Fitchburg pulled out, they'd have pulled out, maybe.
Maybe not.
Well, no, they really... I don't think they could have.
Okay.
Yeah.
Well, did the suit actually go to court?
Did you actually file suit?
No, we were preparing the suit.
But it was apparent to them that legal action was worth coming.
Oh, yes.
And so...
That was certainly a major consideration for their deciding not to go ahead.
Did you advise them that a suit was going on?
Oh, yes.
Indeed, we did.
What would the suit have sought?
I mean, damages, monetary damages?
Let's see.
No, it wasn't.
I mean, it was done.
I don't remember.
We've got a copy of that.
We have that information in our file at work.
Maybe we can check on that, too.
Yeah.
That's another example.
But you're right.
It was damages.
And we'd have to come up with the figure, and this is some of the help that we were offered by EPA to show what environmental damages
occurred over the next several years if Fitchburg Paper Company failed to participate and the construction was delayed by another five years.
Maybe I could talk to somebody down there.
Who should I talk to at the Watershed Association?
Well, you can talk to Lois Murray, Managing Director, or Brown
They're both on vacation this week, and they'll be back in the church.
I'll be working on this next week.
Yeah.
And then there were other things, too, like when Bill Flynn resigned as mayor to become special congressional assistant for Congressman Drinan.
He thought everything was just going to be smooth sailing, but I think it was within a week of the time that the new mayor, or was Mayor Blackwell, I guess, when he was elected,
took office, he asked for an investigation and he thought that he was concerned that there might have been some wrongdoing.
And then it was a situation where not only did we have a new mayor who hadn't participated in any of the discussion or any of the earlier votes on
in Fitchburg on the structural wastewater treatment facilities, but the city council, a majority of them were new members.
And they had to be educated and won over.
So we, and he, Mayor Blackwell called a halt to the construction.